So hi
and welcome to Blueprint Behavior Tree Tasks! In this video we will be
scraping the code on the Blueprint AI Controller,
and instead, we will be creating ourselves a custom task here.
ChooseNextWaypoint with Blackboard keys, and we will be starting to
write some code that will get us back to exactly the behavior we have right now
but with clear architectural advantages, which is that we are then ready,
in the next video, to be able to cycle through the index and actually iterate through any number
of different patrol route points. So I will see you in there!
So when it was just one waypoint we were
heading to it, it was fine for the NPC AI to be finding
that first waypoint. And it says Find Patrol Route, but really all that function
does, at the moment, is find the first index 0 of
the array. But as we move forward, what we want to be able to do is,
in the Behavior Tree here, we want to have a
new node that says choose the next waypoint, and then,
a node the says Move To the waypoint that we've just
chosen. Or we could put all of that in one, it's up to us. The other thing that's not
great about this blueprint here is, using a string reference
literal name here isn't ideal. Now, there is a variable type,
which is of type Blackboard Key Selector.
You could use that and you could pass in to the AI, the Blackboard
Key, but we don't want to do any of that here. What we want is in the
Behavior Tree, we want to have a new task type which doesn't exist
yet, which we're going to create first in Blueprint, and then, later we're going to create this
task in C++, so that you have that skill. And then,
on that task, which will look just like Move To, but it'll be called something slightly different,
we will be able to expose one or more Blackboard Keys
for that. And then, we're going to be able to keep track
of, in the Blackboard of a particular AI, not only the waypoint they're
currently heading to but the index of the array. In fact, why don't we create that
array index now. NextWaypoint
Index. OK, so
that's going to keep track of the index number of the waypoints, that are against the third person
character. So all your data then is in your Blackboard, so
add that key in, it's an integer key called NextWaypointIndex. Great! So
over in the AI, firstly, we no longer are going
to be doing this here, we're going to remove this bit. So I'm just going to pull it down to the side
here, rather than deleting it, skip it in the execution flow, and break any links
to our from it. And then, I'm going to put a comment box around here
by clicking C, and I'm going say TODO Remove. OK, so if we can
power this blueprint up now and try playing, we'll find that obviously this guy doesn't move, because he
doesn't know what his waypoints are. So let's now go ahead and forget the blueprint
here for the AI and move into the Blackboard,
and we're going to make ourself a new task. So in the Blackboard click New Task, and it's
going to make this ugly looking thing called BPTask_BlueprintBase_New. Well let's give that a new name,
for a start! It's in the blueprints folder, and it's going to be choose
NextWaypoint. OK, so that's going to be the name of
the task, ChooseNextWaypoint. There you go, it's taken on the new name! And what this will
allow us to do is to, in the sequence, go
ChooseNextWaypoint as a first port of call, and then,
Move To that waypoint. And later, we will expose Blackboard Keys
on here, so that it knows what to talk to. But for now, we're just going to do it in this blueprint
that has been provided for us, and then, from there we will expand out, as I said, later to C++.
So how are we going to do it here inside the Behvior Tree?
Well let's think about where we even start. Where do you start with one of these things? You
start with an event, and the event that you start with is actually an
AI event called AI Received Execute AI.
Now, how do you know that? Well you could just print straight off it, and you could
say "New Task Running" or something. So
compile that and play, and you see "New Task Running" twice
there. OK, and it gets called twice because we have two AI's. Let's
get rid of one of those AI's for now, so it'll only have I think it's Steve or is it Harry?
You never know which one! Steve, so we only have Steve, so we only get one New Task Running
come up. Great! Alright, so we know that it's running now, that's the first thing! So now let's
block out what we need to do with some comments. Well we need to Get
Patrol Points. This is your pseudocode
programming now, for Blueprint. You Get your Patrol Points.
I could just duplicate that comment I think, because it's the right shape. Then,
we're going to Set the Next
Waypoint, and then, after that we're
going to cycle the Waypoint
index.
Just say Cycle Index. And it needs to go around in a
circular fashion, doesn't it? When we think about the guard here and
his patrol route... And now by the way, this Patrol Route,
being a property of a ThirdPersonCharacter, a little bit dodgy, it's only needed if
the ThirdPersonCharacter is a patrolling character, so you could argue that this should be a
component added onto the character but for simplicity we're going to leave it like this. And also,
later on, we're going to be specializing this ThirdPersonCharacter class
and the AI Controller, so I'll explain why a little bit later on, but let's
just leave Patrol Route as a variable of this ThirdPersonCharacter for now.
See it's fine, but just be aware you could argue that a ThirdPersonCharacter, in general, doesn't
need a Patrol Route on it and this is confusing, but let's just keep things simple while we're trying to
focus on Behavior Tree tasks right now. So we need
to cycle around these, it needs to go 0, 1, 2, 3, 0, 1, 2, 3. So that's
what I mean by cycling around! OK, so it needs to Cycle the
Index. And then, how do we finish? Well there's something called "finish",
and it's called Finish Execute there and that's the final
node OK. And we want to finish with Success. So
now, our job is to write some functions in here that do all of this, so
I'll write Get Patrol Points for you, and then, I'm going to give you some challenges down the road.
So how do we do get Patrol Points? Well I'm just going to write it straight here in line and then
collapse it down into a function. So what do we do? Well we've got the Controlled Pawn
here, and what we can do is we can cast that... [Fumbles Words] I'm trying to get
the words out! We can cast that Controlled Pawn to a Third
Person Character. That's a little bit nasty, that feels a bit dirty doing that, but it's
fine for now, because the pawn itself does not have any Patrol
Points on it, whereas the ThirdPersonCharacter does. So if we come off the
ThirdPersonCharacter and look for Patrol Points, then we get an array of Patrol Points. There
they are and that's great! Now, what do we do with them? Well as we're going to be needing them
later down the line, and we don't want to necessarily pass them around, let's make what's effectively
a member variable right here. So we click + for the variables for this blueprint,
and we make a member variable, a class level variable for this blueprint.
OK, what type is it? Well it's of type Actor,
and it's an array, and it's Patrol Points.
OK great, so we have now a variable! It doesn't
need to be public yet, if we need it to be public we'll make it public later. So we have this
Patrol Point array! We can actually just drag this variable over here,
give it a setter, plumb that in, and then, if
the cast succeeds, then we go ahead and set the Patrol
Points array. OK, that functionality is done, that's pretty
easy! Now, is this working? Are we getting it right? Well I don't know.
If you want to test it before we go on, we can come off here, we can use an Array
Utility to get the first value, and we could get item
0, and then, we could make ourselves a Print node.
And then, you drag from here to the String and it would auto convert,
and we bring the execution off and if you want, we can just check that element 0 is
what we expect. Let's do that, in fact, and make sure that all this
runs! So upstairs is where he's headed, and upstairs is indeed the first
waypoint. so I'm pretty confident that works! I'm going to get rid of the printing and testing over here,
and I'm going to encapsulate these three Blueprint nodes into
a function. So you right-click on them, select them all by dragging with the Left Mouse Button,
and then, select Collapse to Function, pop the function in the box.
It's already got a name, so I'll barrow it's name there, it's called Get Patrol Points,
and let's just rename the function F2. Ooh,
I accidentally didn't copy something!
Get Patrol Points. Perfect! So now, I no longer need
the comment, I have turned it into actual Blueprint code! Great! So
now, we need to set the next waypoint. How are we going to do that? So
I've got a challenge for you, what I want you to do is set the next waypoint. I want you to get the functionality
we had, previous to this video, back but this time in the Behavior Tree rather
than on the AI Controller. Just get him to go to the first waypoint again,
for now, and you can assume that the index value, that index key, initializes its
value to 0. So pause the video, see if you can fill in, purely,
this Set Next Waypoint functionality now, and
if you want, you can pull from that function through to finish execute. We're just going to be
skipping through cycle index for this video. So go ahead, pause the video, and
see if you can recover this functionality over here in the Behavior
Tree task that we've created.
Okey-Dokey! Welcome back! So the
first thing you're going to need to be able to do this is a waypoint index, so I'm going to create a variable
of type Blackboard Keys, in the list here, Blackboard
Key selector, and I'm just going to call it Index and I'm going to make it public.
So the reason we make the index public here is because
we need to store or want to store all the state of the
AI Actor inside the Blackboard. Now, arguabley,
you don't need to store both the Waypoint and the next Waypoint Index, you could
potentially work just off the index, but for simplicity we're going to keep it this way.
Remember, we're going to be re-writing this in C++ shortly.
And if we compile, then over on the Patrol you'll find that
it can say: OK I want to know what the
NextWaypointIndex Blackboard Key is? So you're creating a reference to it there.
This is the functions of what's going to happen in terms of
execution flow, and now, we're wiring it and saying, this is the data you're going to mutate.
So we have a public Blueprint variable. It had to be public or we wouldn't have seen it
over here, and that is an index. Now again,
I'm going to build this outside here, so we have an index there. Now,
what do I need? I need the Patrol Points, so let's go get the Patrol Points array.
Then, from the array we need to use Utilities
array and GET. The Index is just
the Index that we have here. Now, you can't just pull it, because this
is a Blackboard Key selector structure. What we need to do is Get
Blackboard Value as Integer. Hopefully you found that. Then,
we have an integer value, which is the index of the array we're trying to pull from, and then,
all this is saying, right now, because of that Blackboard value... Look  if we play the game
for a second and have a little look at the Blackboard, the
Waypoint Index is initialized to 0. Remember I said you could assume that? So
all we're saying here, in here, is this
Index value will be 0. The value of the actual Blackboard Key is 0, so I'm
going to go and get Patrol Point 0, and that's as simple
as that. Now finally, what we need to do is, we need to set a Blackboard
value as an object, and the key
that we're going to select, we need to also have available for it.
So that is going to be the Waypoint,
the next Waypoint. Public again, compile it up, and then, when we go
back to the Behavior Tree, you'll see that it's asking for the Waypoint and that is
Next Waypoints there. So Index and Waypoint. OK
cool! So then, the key, rather than using a string
reference we can use this, which means the only place that it's wired up is
here, which is the ideal place. You're saying this function needs to mutate
these pieces of data. It's much neater than off to the side in some blueprint.
So that should be it! Let's wire this through and make sure that it works,
before we tidy it up into a function! Hopefully you can see
what's going on there. I'll zoom in a little bit and so you can see it and keep it still for a moment for you.
OK, let's compile it and see what happens!
Does he go to the first waypoint?
Not yet, so let's play and see what's going on
with his Patrol class. He's trying to ChooseNextWaypoint, and the reason is
that, what we have not done is finish executing ChooseNext
Waypoint. So he never moved off this state in the tree. Let's try again!
ChooseNextWaypoint, let's have a look, and it
goes to Move To. And what's happening is jittering here and that's
because Move To is going to SelfActor, and that's because when we renamed
Waypoint to NextWaypoint we just lost the connection here. OK
cool! So now, we set the next waypoint over here and ChooseNextWaypoint,
and then, we move to it here. Let's see if this works!
There he goes, runs up the stairs, and we have recovered the functionality
we had in the last video! We've done things a different way, we now can
probably scrap everything in this TO DO in the blueprint. The blueprint
of the AI Controller is right back to just asset binding again, which is
what we want, we're just binding to the patrol data and the Behavior Tree.
So we can close that down! We now have this ChooseNextWaypoint
task, which is a custom task that we've made. We've
built that in Blueprint,
we've exposed to separate Blackboard Keys there
which while the game is playing keep track of, if we have a look over here,
they keep track of the WaypointIndex and his next Waypoint, and it'll do that
on an AI by AI instance basis, so each guard will have their own
Blackboard. And the great thing about this new architecture is we have the opportunity now
to cycle that index right here, in the right place, and go through.
So I'm just going to encapsulate this into the name of the this function, which is Set Next
Waypoint. I'm going to Collapse to Function.
The function name is simply going to be Set Next Waypoint,
pop it in there. You can delete the comment box now, because we've achieved
the goal, and we are well on the way! In the next video, we'll
go through the cycle index to get this patrolling behavior finished off!